Raksit: Hi everyone. So today I want to talk about some changes going on in Kuy, the language that I do fieldwork with
Raksit: and the implications for tonogenesis. So first let me say as a disclaimer that I'm going to have some extra audio and information on slides that you'll see, having to do with
Raksit: experiment stimuli and design, but I'm going to skip over them in the interest of time, but you'll be able to see them in the attached PDF.
Raksit: All right so let me say that I'm honored to be learning on the traditional, ancestral, and unceded lands of the Ohlone people in Berkeley.
Raksit: And I'm honored to be attending a conference hosted by universities on the traditional, ancestral, and unceded territories of the Musqeam, Squamish, Tsleil-Waututh, Okanagan, Kwikwetlem, Semiahmoo, Katzie, Kwantlen, Qayqayt, and Tsawassen nations.
Raksit: And I'm also honored to be working with the Kuy community and I want to extend special thanks to these two speakers, Sidawun Chaiyapha and Thongwilai Intanai for particularly helping me during my stay.
Raksit: So my objective for this talk is to look at bilingualism and language contact as a catalyst for change.
Raksit: And so basically what we've seen is that in previous tonogenesis studies, there's been a main focus on generational differences, but there's been less focus on the role of contact languages in tonogenesis. Brunelle (2009)
Raksit: has looked at this question though in Chamic languages. So what I want to do in this study is to provide contemporary experimental evidence to support circumstantial evidence that we'll see for contact-induced tonal spread
Raksit: and to that end, I'm going to be exploring the role of language usage and life experience in the shifting of cue weights in the perception of a voice quality distinction in Kuy, and then I'm going to be squaring the perception results with production results looking at the same question.
Raksit: So, let's look at cue weighting and tone a little bit.
Raksit: Literature has shown that there's a tight relationship between phonation and fundamental frequency. So in terms of voicing
Raksit: vowels after voiced consonants have lower f0 on average than after voiceless consonants, whereas in terms of voice quality breathy vowels have lower f0 on average than modal vowels do.
Raksit: Now, tonogenesis, which is the development of phonemic tone is theorized to occur when fundamental frequency goes from being a secondary cue in these phonation contrasts to becoming a primary cue.
Raksit: And in terms of cue weighting, which is the relative usage of a cue, such as fundamental frequency, in perceiving or producing a contrast
Raksit: it's been shown for younger speakers of some languages that have been described as becoming tonogenetic, such as Korean and Afrikaans that there is heavier weighting of f0 over VOT
Raksit: which was the original primary contrast
Raksit: So why do cues shift? This is related to the larger question, known as the actuation problem, proposed by Weinreich et al., which asks: "why does it change happen when it does?" I want to suggest that bilingualism
Raksit: is one of the factors that can lead to a change happening when it does, so we know that bilingualism affects both perception and production.
Raksit: It can lead to convergence at all levels of language, especially over long periods of time.
Raksit: Now the idea that I'm going for, then, is that if one of a speakers' languages, such as Thai, exploits a cue primarily, such as fundamental frequency, it can potentially cause that cue to be more prominent in another one of that speakers languages, such as Kuy.
Raksit: And bilingualism can then interact with social factors to actuate change. So it can be one of a bunch of social factors that can actuate change.
Raksit: So now shifting to the area that we're looking at--this is Mainland Southeast Asia
Raksit: and each of these colors is a different language family. So you can see that it's a linguistically very diverse area. It's also an area that has a lot of tonal languages and
Raksit: historically, it's an area that's been heavily multilingual for a very long time. And this has been suggested to be a potential catalyst for tonogenesis. Now we have circumstantial evidence because of the fact that
Raksit: there are largely non-tonal language families in the area, such as Austroasiatic and Austronesian and in these language families there are some languages that have become tonogenetic over time
Raksit: and these happened to be in heavy contact with tonal languages. More recently tonogenesis has also been described in languages in Thailand. So, Thai is a tonal language and we see these minority languages undergoing tonogenesis.
Raksit: Now the language that we're focusing on is Kuy, which is a language in the Katuic subfamily of Austroasiatic. It's spoken in this area, which is the border area between
Raksit: Thailand, Cambodia, and Laos and the variety I'm going to be focusing on is spoken here in Northeast Thailand. So here's a zoomed in map.
Raksit: and the distinction that we're looking at is modal versus breathy voice. So the minimal pair here is between /ti:/, which is modal, and /ti͈:/, which is breathy [sic]. If you listen to the audio, you'll hear these words, followed by the end of a sentence.
Raksit: Now breathiness can lead to a bundle of side effects, which can then effect change. So I've already mentioned that lowered fundamental frequency is a feature of breathy voice and this can lead to a low tone.
Raksit: A lowered first formant is also a feature of breathiness and this can lead to vowel raising or diphthongization as has been shown in other languages with this voice quality distinction.
Raksit: In terms of the linguistic situation of Kuy, there's been a growing preference for Thai in the last 20 years
Raksit: and in the present day in Ban Khi Nak, which is the village that I was doing my work in, I interviewed several speakers and
Raksit: what I gathered was that parents in their 20s and 30s generally speak Thai to their children. And even if they do speak in Kuy, their children usually respond in Thai
Raksit: and because of this, the majority of participants in my study expressed a worry that Kuy might stop being used in the future.
Raksit: Now, the ability to speak four languages is a badge of pride for the Kuy. So this is a very multilingual area because it's on the border
Raksit: of three different countries. So Kuy, Thai, Lao, and Northern Khmer are the four languages that are spoken in this area, but we see from these numbers that while older speakers can speak four languages, younger speakers are able to speak only two or maybe even just Thai
Raksit: Now, in terms of the social situation, there's also more Thai usage in the younger generation because we can see from the information up here that
Raksit: schooling now lasts longer. So whereas school was only offered up to fourth grade in the past, now
Raksit: younger people will generally go to school all the way through high school and then leave elsewhere for college or for work.
Raksit: especially because movement has been made easier by better transportation. So there's more integration into
Raksit: Thai society in the present day because of rapid modernization and centralization and this is aided by better transportation and also by increased media access to Central Thai media.
Raksit: And school teachers are also now hired from other provinces, as opposed to just recruited from the local area. So people are hearing and using a lot more Thai and central Thai.
Raksit: Now linguistically other parts of the phonology are nearing Thai and Lao so there's lots of prenasalization, for example, and merger between final /l/ and /r/.
Raksit: We can think of the change from using the breathiness cue to using the fundamental frequency cue as part of this bundle of
Raksit: changes that is making it more like Thai or Lao. And these mergers also lead to fewer onset and coda distinctions, which then
Raksit: basically increases the functional load on the breathiness contrast.
Raksit: However, if breathiness is weakened by contact, there will then be a pressure to increase the fundamental frequency difference, leading to tonogenesis and that's what we see in some other Kuy dialects.
Raksit: So the hypothesis is that Kuy speakers who are more integrated into Thai society and/or who use more Thai or Lao will be less sensitive to breathiness cues but more sensitive to fundamental frequency cues.
Raksit: And I'm going to be agnostic about whether perception and production are aligned or not in this change because while it is aligned in some changes, some literature has shown that one lags behind the other
Raksit: All right, so to make the stimuli, I adapted a script that was written by Mark Brunelle and James Kirby.
Raksit: for an experiment that's being talked about in the Languages on the Margins session, so you should check that talk out as well.
Raksit: So I used the script to create continua between two different minimal pairs and I based the parameters off the values from a production study
Raksit: and what I did with these stimuli was then I piloted them and revised them for naturalness, so
Raksit: it was presented on OpenSesame on a tablet and they carried out the experiment in a temple room, which was the quietest place that I could find for
Raksit: this experiment. And so this is Thongwilai Intanai on the left, piloting my experiment.
Raksit: Basically you see what she sees on the screen here on the right. So this is a two-alternative forced choice task. The participants basically
Raksit: hear a sound that's going to be between [taʔ] and [ta͈ʔ] or [ti:] and [ti͈:] and they're going to pick which picture the word that they heard corresponds to
Raksit: So here's the layout of the experiment. Basically there's a practice round for familiarization with the task and the images and then there are alternating blocks.
Raksit: with optional breaks in between, looking at both syllables. Now I analyzed 64 out of 74 the participants to get a stratified sample and to throw out speakers who had issues.
Raksit: And these were balanced for various features such as gender and age and they were also balanced for condition in order to account for ordering effects. I then
Raksit: had a follow-up sociolinguistic interview on questions on demographics, life experience, language attitudes, identity, and other questions.
Raksit: So let's take a look at how the raw results look like to understand what's going on. So we expect variation in the weighting of open quotient, OQ, which is the breathiness correlate and fundamental frequency cues.
Raksit: So here are examples from two extremes speakers.
Raksit: What we see on the x-axis is that as you go up, this is going to be higher OQ values, which means that the stimuli are going to sound breathier. On the y-axis, this is the percent
Raksit: of responses that the speaker identified [sic] as breathy for each specific combination.
Raksit: So what you see, of course, is that as the stimuli are more breathy, the more likely they are to be identified as breathy. So that's unsurprising. The curve goes up as you move right.
Raksit: In terms of F0, so as you move from the red side of the rainbow to the purple side of the rainbow, you're increasing in fundamental frequency and because modal voice has higher fundamental frequency than breathy voice on average,
Raksit: what you're seeing, then, is basically that
Raksit: as fundamental frequency increases, the curve is going to be lower. And you're going to have a higher proportion of modal answers.
Raksit: Now there are differences between the speakers. So for example, the left speaker has an s-curve function that's barely influenced by f0. The difference between the curves is much smaller
Raksit: than for the right speaker, where we see that the curves actually sort of fan out. So basically the right speaker is influenced a lot more by f0 in their decision of whether a token is breathy or modal.
Raksit: Now, so we're going to keep that graph in mind
Raksit: when we look at the actual results. So in order to select for variables, because I had a lot of variables that were
Raksit: sociolinguistic variables that are highly correlated with each other, we have to deal with that high correlation. And so to do that, I carried out a principal components analysis, which tries to
Raksit: reduce a bunch of highly correlated variables into smaller dimensions in order to to compare. So looking at the horizontal axis, these are the results of the PCA.
Raksit: And the PCA basically shows us that there are values that are highly correlated on one dimension,
Raksit: which include age and ability to speak or understand Kuy, and then also relative frequency of usage with friends or family. All right, so
Raksit: this is what I'm going to call "experience". Dimension 2 is what I'm going to call "integration" because it corresponds positively to being away from home and therefore being more integrated into Thai society. It corresponds negatively also with identifying as
Raksit: Kuy, so the higher you are in Dimension 2 the more likely the less likely you are to identify strongly as Kuy. All right, so
Raksit: I carried out a mixed effects logistics regression analysis and looked at the interaction of all fixed effects so open quotient, fundamental frequency, gender experience, and integration, which are the two dimensions that we just looked at.
Raksit: And there are random intercepts for speaker and syllable and I found that the five-way interaction was significant. Now, lower order interactions are also significant, but we're going to focus on the large picture here.
Raksit: And the effects for the model are then estimated with the effects package and the results are what you see here in this very large daunting graph. So we're going to break this graph
Raksit: down, piece by piece. In order to understand it. So these are the curves for male speakers.
Raksit: And what we see is that they generally look kind of like the raw results right? So, as you increase in open quotient, you are getting more breathy responses.
Raksit: As you're increasing in fundamental frequency, the curves are going to be lower. All right, they're going to be biased towards being modal.
Raksit: Now, in terms of the social factors, higher experience, so, this corresponds with being older or using
Raksit: more Kuy or using Kuy better, what happens is that you see that the curves are going to become closer together. So these are the fanned out curves versus
Raksit: the barely fanned out curves. So basically, the fundamental frequency cue is less important if you have more experience and open quotient is more important. It's being weighed as more important here.
Raksit: Now, in terms of integration, which as you go from left to right, so these are the columns.
Raksit: So on the left side are people who have not really left the village much or who identify strongly as Kuy. On the right side are people who are more integrated into Thai society and have left the village longer
Raksit: or are identifying less as Kuy. And what you see here is that as you go to the right, the curves flatten and they become less s-like
Raksit: So here, very s-like here, less s-like, which means that at the extreme
Raksit: open quotient values, they're not even 100% on deciding it as either modal or breathy, which suggests that there's some attrition of the open quotient, of the breathiness cue, and therefore the breathiness is affecting less.
Raksit: Now there is an exception up here in the upper left corner where we see that the upper left is less s-like than the upper right.
Raksit: So what's going on here? Well, what we see is that the curve sort of fans out at the left on the modal tokens. So the identification of low open quotient tokens is heavily dependent on f0. We can see that these curves are very far apart on the left. Now what I'm going to suggest is that
Raksit: These speakers are using Thai or Lao a lot, right? And that means that they're hearing a lot of Thai and Lao, which don't have breathy voice, but
Raksit: what they do have is a tonal distinction. And so since the speakers are hearing these modal voice words that differing in f0, they might be transferring that cue on to
Raksit: on to Kuy.
Raksit: All right, so here's a summary of the results that are going on. You can take a look at them in the attached PDF.
Raksit: Now we're gonna look at gender differences. So here are the curves for female speakers. What you'll see is that the same general patterns hold but the curves are flatter and less s-like, so
Raksit: actually, we can take a look at all the curves in general and we can see that the curves for male speakers are more s-like than for female speakers.
Raksit: The social effects are also weaker for women. So for example, if we look at integration.
Raksit: if we look at male speakers, the curves on the left are very s-like, the curves on the right are very flat, but for female speakers, this difference is not as pronounced.
Raksit: In terms of experience, we see that whereas for male speakers
Raksit: if they are lower in experience, they are much more influenced by f0, but for female speakers this difference is not as pronounced.
Raksit: Now an interesting pattern here is that we see that women who rank low on experience show a bias to identify tokens as breathy if they're less integrated
Raksit: but if they're more integrated than they are actually more likely to identify tokens overall as modal. So this is kind of interesting. This is why the tokens are all the curves are down here.
Raksit: And here's a summary of the patterns that you can see on the attached PDF. Now let's look at the production results. All right, so
Raksit: the production results are preliminary. I've looked at the 32 speakers who are on the extreme ends of generation: 20s and 60s.
Raksit: They're balanced for gender as well. And they're also balanced for being away long. So I chose as the value of being away long, if you're away for four or more years, you are considered to be away long. This was the median value that allowed for a
Raksit: balanced distribution between those who are away long and those who are not.
Raksit: So, how to read these graphs? If we look at the x-axis, this is the time point. So these are average trajectories of the vowels. So the further right you are, the more later in the vowel you are.
Raksit: On the y-axis, this is the measure we're interested in. So here we're looking for example at H1*-H2*, which is the proxy for breathiness.
Raksit: And if we compare breathy voice, the solid lines, to modal voice, the dotted lines, what we see is that breathy voice has higher H1*-H2* values. That's not surprising, We see the inverse for f0, where breathy voice has lower f0 on average than modal voice.
Raksit: Now we can look at the social variables. So,
Raksit: if we look at the blue lines, these are people who have been away long versus the red lines, which are people who have not been away as long. So, those who are away longer have a smaller H1*-H2*
Raksit: difference, the curves are closer together than for the red ones. And we see that the blue curves on the right,
Raksit: in terms of f0, they have a larger have f0 difference. The blue curves are farther apart than the red curves are.
Raksit: Now, there aren't enough speakers yet for a cross section with away long. The cells basically end up getting really small, there are very small numbers in each cell
Raksit: and I'm hoping to remedy this as I look at more speakers, but we can look at gender crossed by generation, so
Raksit: here what we're looking at is that young speakers are blue, older speakers are red. So younger speakers, well younger women have the weakest H1*-H2* difference. Their curves are the closest together, but we can see that
Raksit: for men, the difference doesn't really matter much, although the shapes of the curves are definitely different.
Raksit: In terms of f0, what we see is that younger people have a clearer f0 different. So the blue curves are on the outside of the red curves.
Raksit: And this is especially noticeable for younger women. So to compare the perception and production results, what we see is that
Raksit: older men or those who rank higher on experience are the most conservative. They're the ones weighing open quotient the highest, the heaviest. And younger women or women who rank low on experience are spearheading the loss of breathiness.
Raksit: Now there are some differences in perception and production. So, for example,
Raksit: in perception. It's lower experience men who are the ones that rely the most on fundamental frequency
Raksit: but in production, it's the younger women who are the ones that rely the most on fundamental frequency. So remember that younger corresponds with being lower experience. Now in perception, men are more affected by social factors
Raksit: than women are. And what's interesting here now is the difference at the very bottom, so
Raksit: in terms of production, we see that there's a trade off both
Raksit: if you are younger, there's a trade off between open quotient and fundamental frequency. This corresponds with lower experience. And if you're away longer
Raksit: then you also have a trade off between open quotient and fundamental frequency. This corresponds with being more integrated into Thai society.
Raksit: Now in perception, though, what we see is that the trade off only occurs in the population that is low experience and also lowly integrated. But, if you are highly integrated in Thai society, you only have dulling of the breathiness cue without any trade off so
Raksit: Let's sum up this case and explain that a little bit. Now, those who are both younger or lower experience and also those who have been away longer or are more integrated into Thai society
Raksit: have a trade off between breathiness and fundamental frequency cues in production, but in perception, greater integration only ends up weakening the breathiness cues without the trade off.
Raksit: Where we see the trade off is in the low experience low integration group. So let me try to maybe
Raksit: offer a possible explanation for this. Now, those who are lower experience are going to be receiving more Thai input proportionally,
Raksit: But those who are going away, are going to be people who hear very little or no Kuy
Raksit: at all while they're away because Kuy is not used in other parts of Thailand, which means that both in perception and production, the breathiness cue is going to be dulled for these people.
Raksit: Now, these people are gonna be using Thai a lot and what they might do is they might recruit that tonal contrast in Thai in order to enhance the contrast in producing this distinction that they know exists in Kuy, that they have in Kuy.
Raksit: And what happens is that they then come back to the village, and because people socialize with peers of similar age, they're going to be hearing their peers who have come back and who are maybe enhancing that
Raksit: f0 difference in production. And so they might have an enhanced difference, they might be weighing the f0 cue more heavily because that's what they're hearing.
Raksit: All right, so back to the actuation question then, basically what I'm suggesting is that the situation is ripe for tonogenesis in Kuy because of the increasing encroachment of Thai, which is a tonal language.
Raksit: And this change is occurring in the village. So these micro-effects show how contact, especially in a society with changing social dynamics can play a role in catalyzing tonogenesis. All right, so thank you very much everyone. [kʰɑ̀pkʰun krɑ͈pnaʔ]